---
layout: post
title:  "Java"
tags: java
---
[Underscores in Numeric Literals][underscores-literals]

In Java SE 7 and later, any number of underscore characters (_) can appear anywhere between digits in a numerical literal. This feature enables you, for example, to separate groups of digits in numeric literals, which can improve the readability of your code.

{% highlight java %}
private static int MOD = 1_000_000_007
{% endhighlight %}

[Enhanced For][for]
The for statement also has another form designed for iteration through *Collections* and *arrays* This form is sometimes referred to as the enhanced for statement, and can be used to make your loops more compact and easy to read.

## Multidimensional Array
{% highlight java %}
int[][] matrix = new int[r][c];
// r == matrix.length
// c == matrix[0].length
{% endhighlight %}

[Remainder Operator %][remainder-operator]

In C and C++, the remainder operator accepts only integral operands, but in the Java programming language, it also accepts floating-point operands.

### Integer

1. The remainder operation can be negative only if the dividend is negative, and can be positive only if the dividend is positive.
2. The magnitude of the result is always less than the magnitude of the divisor.

{% highlight java %}
(a / b) * b + (a % b) == a
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight java %}
int a = 5 % 3;  // 2
int b = 5 / 3;  // 1

int c = 5 % (-3);  // 2
int d = 5 / (-3);  // -1

int e = (-5) % 3;  // -2
int f = (-5) / 3;  // -1

int g = (-5) % (-3);  // -2
int h = (-5) / (-3);  // 1
{% endhighlight %}

### Floating-point

The Java programming language defines % on floating-point operations to behave in a manner analogous to that of the integer remainder operator.

{% highlight java %}
double a = 5.0 % 3.0;  // 2.0

double b = 5.0 % (-3.0);  // 2.0

double c = (-5.0) % 3.0;  // -2.0

double d = (-5.0) % (-3.0);  // -2.0
{% endhighlight %}

## Queue
[Queue][queue]

Queue implementations generally do not allow insertion of ***null*** elements, although some implementations, such as **LinkedList**, do not prohibit insertion of null. Even in the implementations that permit it, null should not be inserted into a Queue, as null is also used as a special return value by the poll method to indicate that the queue contains no elements.

[underscores-literals]: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/language/underscores-literals.html
[for]: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/java/nutsandbolts/for.html
[remainder-operator]: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se8/html/jls-15.html#jls-15.17.3
[queue]: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Queue.html
